# ∑ The language-game of certainty
created:: 2022-08-31 05:16
modified:: <%+ tp.file.last_modified_date() %>
mode: #mode/creation
kind:: #kind/article/shortform
status:: #status/seed
parent:: [[∂ Article Dashboard]]
***



### Talk about how the brain works by prediction and modeling. There is always a running ahead of the actual sensory data.

Start with the bold claim.

When Mormons say that they “know” that their church is the only true church, they often (usually) misunderstand how that certainty developed. And once they understand how it developed, it is hard for them to not see it as a self-defeating kind of certainty.

The kind of certainty that Mormons have is NOT the kind that comes from having been compelled to believe. Like in science or philosophy. There is no proof of God or experimental demonstration of God that is driving their certainty. And most Mormons would be quick to agree with this, because they have a fear of being compelled to do anything, especially believe. In Mormon doctrine, compulsion is part of Satan’s plan. Satan wanted to save all of god’s children, and his idea was to compel them to believe and obey. But this would have destroyed the agency of mankind and defeated the whole point of mortality, which is to be tested. Being compelled to be certain of God’s existence is like being given the answer key. It might help you get the correct answer, but it is cheating and it ultimately hurts you in the end because it makes you less likely to learn.

Likewise, the kind of certainty that Mormons have is NOT the kind of certainty you have when someone asks you if you are sure that you're happy (because maybe you don't quite look happy). There is an experience of having a subjective certainty, an experience of infallibility when it comes to knowing one's own experiences. That kind of certainty is a result of having what we feel is a privileged access to something. If anyone could be certain about whether I'm happy, it must be me.

Rather, the kind of certainty that Mormons have comes from having made a decision to interpret an ambiguous event as having come from God. It is an act of faith. When Christ came, he constantly told people to doubt not, but be believing. This works, because he is with the people, in the flesh, and they can have a relationship with him and build trust in him. Having faith in a person is a central part of being a social human. Jesus is right there, doing miracles, and saying, “Trust me. I know this sounds impossible, but if you can’t believe that it will happen, at least trust me, because I know that it will happen.” And then he does it, right there in front of you. When Jesus is dead and gone, having faith in him changes somewhat. The communication is no longer face to face. There is a new ambiguity about communication with him or God. There is a gap that must be filled. The leap of faith fills the gap; we choose (or our desire chooses for us) to see the event as divine, and it magically becomes so.

So, we are the source of the divine quality of our experiences, as well as the source of our certainty that they are divine. Some people will be okay with the postmodern implications of this. But many will not be. Because what are these implications?

Particularly when the “revelation” received has to do with a truth-claim (e.g., joseph smith was a true prophet of god), the mechanism of certainty is self-defeating. Being certain that something is true isn’t worth very much if that certainty rests upon your having made a decision that it is true. We don’t want to be the origin of our certainty about truth-claims regarding the external world. We want the external world itself (in this case, God and the quality of his communication with us) to be the source of our certainty. But we have already ruled out this possibility. This was Satan’s plan.

So when is this type of certainty not a problem? Well, when the certainty is about claims regarding our own experience. I am certain that I love this person. “Well, you’re only certain that you love this person because you decided to love this person.” Yes, that is true, and there is no problem with it. There are some states of affairs that are true if and only if we decide that they are. This is the unproblematic application of the certainty-by-fiat language game.

- You need to deal with the possibly very large majority of church members who believe that spirit is a substance, a kind of matter that is not accessible to us scientifically. It is this third category of stuff. It isn’t subjective, private mind stuff (although some prophets have tried to equate spirit with mind, and it clearly is portrayed as giving us subjective experiences because it is a quasi-self). It isn’t objectively or intersubjectively verifiable matter that can be intervened with at a scientific level. It only appears to be indirectly connected to mind (in the sense that it generates experiences that are only available to you and not other people around you), and it possesses none of the useful properties of physical matter. This makes it very hard to talk about, and it also has the effect of creating a semantic set of training wheels. If everything else goes off the rails, spirit matter will save you. This is due to the fact that claims involving spirit are unfalsifiable. You can just say all sorts of magical things, and nobody can attack your claims. But you’ll also have to be okay with the fact that most people that want to attack your claims think you’re deluded.
- So how do we deal with this? We have to show how the corpus of things that have been said about this spirit matter are internally inconsistent or incoherent. We have to grant them the point that it might exist, drop any efforts to evaluate it according to the methods we’ve developed for every other kind of matter, and just make them accept increasingly absurd conclusions based on their own premises. Our only recourse is reductio ad absurdum, appealing to the member’s sense that things should at least be internally consistent and not require absurd admissions.
- Another important point: the church appears to be modifying many of its truth claims so that they are becoming less objective and more subjective. In effect, they are making the claims less falsifiable by relegating them more completely to the inward, private experience of the prophets and members. For example, the church is now ready to emphasize that all of Joseph Smith’s visions, including the First Vision, were not visions with his actual eyes, but were spiritually perceived. The church is also ready to admit that the witnesses to the book of mormon experienced what they did at a spiritual level, not directly through their physical senses. Another example is the catalyst theory, which has been applied to the Book of Abraham and its relationship to the Egyptian fragments from which it was supposedly translated, the masonic elements of the Temple ceremony, and more recently, the Book of Mormon and its relationship to the golden plates. The number of falsifiable claims made by the church is rapidly shrinking, and it is because they are backing off on the literal, objective reading that the claims originally had.
- Certainty can come from being convinced. It can also come from a need for something to be the case. These are two very different kinds of certainty.
- The latter appears to be primarily a function of investment into a proposition. It is a staking of one’s credibility and functionality as a rational being. Being effectively convinced of something trivial doesn’t quite rise to the status of a state of certainty. For example, suppose I tell you that camelhair brushes don’t give live birth to other camelhair brushes. I go to great lengths to tell you about the biology of live birth, what camelhair brushes are made of, and how camelhair brushes are actually made. Now, suppose someone asks you after this, “Are you certain that camelhair brushes don’t give live birth to other camelhair brushes?” In a trivial sense, the answer would be yes, but only in the sense that you wouldn’t want to deny that this is the case. But there is little interest in asserting that this claim is true, because it belongs in that infinitely large category of things that are not true and that nobody has ever claimed are true. This is not the same kind of certainty that one experiences around non-trivial claims, such as the claim that the earth is not flat. This is, after all, a claim that many people have made. Asserting certainty about this latter claim comes along with an investment. It is an alignment.
- 
- 
- Another important point: when people talk about faith as the moving principle of all action, they are conflating two very different kinds of experiential states. We don’t do everything we do throughout the day because we are cognitively certain about causes and effects. Action does not require belief. There are plenty of organisms that act, and yet they are not capable of belief. Split-brain experiments lay bare the confabulatory foundations of the cognitive explanations of our own actions; in most healthy people, it just so happens that we have two parallel models that are trained on basically the same data: the “action” model and the “explanatory” model. The explanatory model is continually getting error feedback and reinforcement regarding what counts as a good explanation of an action. But this can go awry in healthy people, and it is forced awry in experiments with split brain patients. NOTE: Confabulation appears to be an important key to understanding the self. Confabulation typically presents as an ownership error. Of course, the action belongs to the body that carried it out, and in that sense it belongs to the self. But it doesn’t belong to the same self that is trying to explain the motivation for the action. The split-brain patient can see that they did something, and therefore cannot deny that it was their action; but they are fabricating, in real time, post hoc motivations for the action as a way of making sense of it, as a way of attempting to tie it in to coherent, continuous narrative. RELATED NOTE: Schizophrenia is a disorder in the attribution of action and thought. 

On the language game of certainty in the church

**What does God sound like?**

Mormonism encourages members to learn to recognize the difference between the the voice of God and their own passing thoughts and judgments. There are several guidelines given in scripture. For example, there is the “burning in the bosom” that Oliver Cowdery was told to look for. There is the only slightly more ambiguous description of “pure intelligence” flowing into your mind, as described by Joseph Smith. We are told by multiple authors that there are “fruits of the spirit” — i.e., specific affective states that signal the presence of God. In the book of Moroni, we are unironically told to beg the question and assume that that if something encourages us to do good and follow God, it is good and comes from God.

also, mention the rules governing revelation to other people, governed by priesthood keys.

Also, all revelation should be consistent with the revealed word of god. The only exception to this is the prophets themselves, who can disavow old teachings and replace them with new teachings

There are some shortcuts in this learning process. We can go to holy places, like a temple or the sacred grove. The presence of God is in these physical locations, so we’ll more readily feel and recognize how he speaks to us if we go there often enough. We can engage in certain activities that will more readily invite God: testifying, prayer, fasting, selfless service, etc. If we do these things, we will flood our world with the presence of God, and we’ll gradually learn to understand the language of God.

**The attribution error of spiritual certainty**

However, there are some wrinkles in this story. Joseph Smith and Mormon agree that we have individual “gifts of the spirit” and, by extension, “weaknesses of the spirit”. Some of us get to hear the voice of God and some of us have to believe those that do. Also, it isn’t difficult to find contemporary prophets telling us that we all receive revelation differently. God speaks to some people through specific emotions, others he actually talks to, others he puts ideas in their heads, others he inspires artistically, etc. This raises the inevitable question of how we are supposed to know what to look for, and whether we should pay close attention to the descriptions of revelation given by prophets.

There is also a distinct tension between revelation and accountability in LDS doctrine; God will only nudge us to a minimally effective degree because if the revelation is so forceful that it is undeniable, it will make us over-accountable and expose our souls to a law that we are not ready to live, ultimately condemning us. It seems to be baked in to the very idea of revelation that it must be ambiguous enough that attributing it to God requires a leap of faith. When leaders and members of the church testify that revelation from God has produced more certainty in them than what their physical senses could offer, it seems likely that they are committing an attribution error by assuming that it is the nature of the experience that produced this certainty. It is wrong to doubt their certainty, but it is permissible to ask if that certainty is actually coming from the nature of the experience that they attribute to God. After all, if it was something about the experience itself that produced absolute certainty, wouldn’t it just as readily achieve the same end as a miraculous vision or audible voice from God? If it was something about the content of the experience itself that produced certainty, wouldn’t it open them up to precisely as much condemnation as an unambiguous sensory experience would? Rather, I think the more likely explanation is that their certainty derives from the ambiguity of the experience, and *what that ambiguity requires of them in order to be certain*. The experience itself is insufficient; it requires a decision to be certain. Thus, it is possible to agree that so-called spiritual experiences produce more certainty than other experiences mediated by physical senses (granting the dubitable premise that spiritual experiences can come to us as unembodied entities), while simultaneously disagreeing on the mechanism of that certainty.

**How to be certain**

The voice of God will always be ambiguous. Not only is this doctrinally mandated, as mentioned above, but it is an inescapable consequence of being organisms that can question the source of their experiences. You’ll never have an experience that you can’t simply attribute to your own brain. If such a skepticism hasn’t been available to primitive humans, culturally isolated and conjuring gods with mushrooms and leaves, then at least it is demanded of us now, given what we know about the brain and its role as the physical substrate of our experience. The human brain is capable of incredible feats of imagination, and it is capable of giving us that imaginative world in the form of sensory experiences. Hallucinations, delusions, misperceptions, and even everyday experiences are the compelling productions of a closed system that is doing its best to predict what is happening in the outside world, based on what has happened in the past. With only a handful of cultural exceptions, to be human today is to participate in the global realization that there is no experience we have that we shouldn’t outright assume to be the production of our brain. And this applies to cases where we are trying to decide whether a thought came from God or came from our brain (including the apologist’s case where it came from both, which is just another way of saying that it came from God). How can we be certain?

Faith is a commitment to hear what you want to hear and see what you want to see, and to ignore evidence to the contrary. This is arguably the basis of the most meaningful experiences we have in this life. It is a feature, not a bug, of our humanity. This is the cornerstone of a loving, committed relationship. It is the cornerstone of devotion to a cause or to a country or to a friend. Faithfulness presupposes a decision that precedes evidence. Otherwise, there is always the danger that we may not continue to choose whatever we have chosen. Faith is the declaration that some things are more important than new evidence.

It is no mistake that the prophet Mormon begs the question and tells us that we can know what is from God if we just look and see if it fits what we already know about what God wants us to do. It is no mistake that Alma implores us to “desire to believe” in order to eventually produce the phenomenon of certainty. Circularity is the only way. There is no other way to reach into the semantic void between our sensory experiences and the claim that some of them come from a God.

**The dangers of certainty**

It is one thing to choose Mormonism and make the decision to be certain about the truth-claims of LDS leadership. This itself is a single, massive act of ambiguity reduction by asserting that something is true and then finding evidence for it. It is an entirely different thing to navigate the dyadic communication between yourself and God with the same level of certainty. This is a continuous flow of ambiguous experiences that require a new faithful intervention in order to take on their meaning. Here, we enter the realm where people bootstrap certainty about an idea coming from God, feel a rush of emotions upon “realizing” that the idea came from God, and then cement their certainty around the idea because it came from God. It isn’t hard to see how this could become dangerous.

From an anthropological distance, there is beauty in the diverse tapestry of ideas and claims that humans have decided to be certain about. Such certainty produces compelling art that gathers up and holds an entire worldview. It seems harmless enough from such a distance. When you zoom in and look at the individual lives of people who are caught up in religious certainty, ugliness comes into focus. It is at this level that we discover the consequences of individuals being certain about what God says to them as they navigate their moral landscape. Here is where people shame, exclude, punish, control, and kill others after having felt compelled by God to do so, unaware of the fact that they conjured God in order to reduce ambiguity.

Take this fascinating example from Boyd Packer’s talk, [“The Mantle Is Far, Far Greater Than the Intellect”](https://www.lds.org/manual/teaching-seminary-preservice-readings-religion-370-471-and-475/the-mantle-is-far-far-greater-than-the-intellect?lang=eng):

> I want to tell you of another lesson I received. Many years ago, when I was a new General Authority and not very experienced, I was called to the office of the First Counselor in the First Presidency. “We find you are going to the West Coast for conference this weekend. We wonder if you would leave a day or so early to help with a problem at a mission headquarters in another city.”
> 

> A missionary had confessed to transgression, and the mission president was reluctant to take action. I was instructed to see that a court was convened and that the missionary was excommunicated.
> 

> I went, and I interviewed the elder at great length. I then went to a park to think and pray about it. It was an unusual case, most unusual. After two hours, I telephoned the member of the First Presidency from a pay telephone and told him a little of what I had learned and of how I felt about the matter. He asked what I wanted to do. Hesitantly I told him I wanted to delay, to take no action now. Then I said, “But, President, tell me to do it, again, and I will do it.”
> 

> His voice came over the telephone and seemed like thunder to me: “Don’t you go against the voice of the Spirit!”
> 

> I had learned a great lesson. I have never forgotten it, and the inspiration greatly affected the outcome when final action was taken.
> 

Notice that the content or quality of Boyd’s intuition itself didn’t produce certainty. It was ambiguous. He thought that delaying might be the correct course of action, but he wasn’t sure. Then an apostle told him that his vacillation was, in essence, a form of ignoring the voice of God. The idea appears to be that our initial or favored impulses, perhaps once we reach a certain point in our discipleship, are literally the voice of God. Eventually, you have to just reach the point where you decide that you’ve got it down. You’ve done this enough. You develop a sort of confidence that you know what God’s voice sounds like. It is chilling to think about the lives that have been ruined by someone in authority choosing to be certain about an ambiguous impulse they had.

What is it like to be an apostle or the president of the church, where there are no more people to tell you what is of God and what is coming from the boiling, chaotic cauldron of your desires, appetites, needs, biases, habits, and history? Here, in Brother Packer’s story, we get a glimpse into the education of man who became unshakeable in his certainty that God was telling him that LGTBQ people are broken and that education is dangerous. It is this kind of certainty that is responsible for a legacy of racism, misogyny, and homophobia in the LDS church.

For the last few centuries, as a scientific worldview has expanded from the elite minority to the general population, we have seen a sharp increase in the tension between faith and reason. It is the defining dichotomy of our age, born of the uniquely human need to understand our place in the universe, and ferociously catalyzed by the immediacy and overabundance of information on the internet. At least, that is how the story usually goes.

I question the assumption that reason is necessarily opposed to faith.

Pascal: “The heart has its reasons, which reason does not know.”

but I think there is a more important dichotomy that truly defines the differences that separate people in our culture. Commitment and revisability. The opposite of faith isn’t reason. The opposite of faith is

**Argument 1: Faith in a deity is irrational because rationality demands that we only accept premises that are sufficiently probable.**

**Argument 2: All belief is the result of a process of reasoning. If you can answer the question, “Why do you believe?”, then you are at least implicitly stating that you believe because of a syllogism. If this is true, then it leaves religious people open to the criticism that their syllogism is invalid.**

Here are two points to consider:

(1) it might not be accurate that people believe because of a syllogism, even if you can get them to give you reasons for their belief. Humans are bad at knowing all of the explanations for their behavior.

(2) it might be true that their syllogism is invalid. But if this were the case, then simply pointing it out to them should fix it. This rarely works. So what is probably more likely the case is that either (a) they do have rational grounds for their belief, but they simply accept premises that you wouldn’t accept, or (b) they have unknown causes and motives behind their beliefs, not simply a list of reasons that can be stated.

Desiring to believe in Alma 32.

Alma 32 describes the process of confirmation bias. But that is exactly what faith is! Confirmation bias is a feature, not a bug, of faith. This process does give us meaningful phenomena. It gives us God. It gives us love. It gives us an autobiographical sense of self. All of these things require the confirmation bias that is the core feature of faith.

Excerpts from the Faith entry at [LDS.org](http://lds.org/):

> Faith is to hope for things which are not seen, but which are true (Heb. 11:1; Alma 32:21).
> 

> Faith is kindled by hearing the testimony of those who have faith (Rom. 10:14–17).
> 

> Miracles do not produce faith, but strong faith is developed by obedience to the gospel of Jesus Christ; in other words, faith comes by righteousness, although miracles often confirm one’s faith.
> 

> All true faith must be based upon correct knowledge or it cannot produce the desired results.
> 

Rationality is a construction of language. To be rational, as best as I can tell, is to adhere to the conventions of logic, and logic has little to say about what is true outside of its own conventions. That is, logical truths are truths about the structure of language, not about factual states of affairs in the world.

Asserting that something doesn’t exist can be a rational act, in some cases. For example, we can assert that states of affairs described by logical paradoxes cannot exist (i.e., “There is no such thing as an omnipotent god that can create a stone so large that he can’t lift it.”). But notice that this is less a statement about a deity, and more a statement about the rules of language. Conversely, asserting that something does exist cannot be a logical or rational act. At best, we can logically assert that things can or cannot exist. But asserting that things do exist is a-rational or pre-rational (i.e., outside of rationality) rather than rational or irrational (i.e., counter to rationality). It is possible to logically deduce that something exists, but that requires accepting other pre-rational premises first, and deduction is certainly not what is happening with religious faith.

Language games. Religious people and secular people are doing different things with language. They are playing different language games.

How do we bridge the gap between language games? Well, first we try to diagnose the degree to which an individual is playing each of the different possible language games. Let’s just focus on two. Mormonism and secularism.

There are some questions that define the difference between Mormonism and secularism:

1. How do we find truth?
2. What does it mean to be a good person?
3. What is certainty?

**In Mormonism:**

*Truth:* The language game is commitment to (1) the epistemic framework given by an elite class, and (2) confirmation of that framework via emotional tags. This extends to any kind of statement or claim.

*Goodness:* The language game is rather difficult to pin down. It can switch at will between divine command theory (e.g., “It is good because it comes from God.”) and a reverse divine command theory that ends up being a delayed secularism (e.g., “It is good (and we know it is good because lots of other good people agree that it is), so it must come from God.”). The latter is not so much an ethical position as it is a metaphysical one (since it doesn’t directly tell us what or who is good). The latent ethical theory appears to be close to virtue ethics. There is an emphasis on gaining virtues that are godly and good, and there is a continual refinement of a hierarchy of those virtues. Also, these virtues are largely embodied in people; they don’t exist unless they exist in human behavior (which speaks to the faith vs works issue). We learn of them by observing others and by hearing faith-promoting stories.

**In secularism:**

*Truth:* The language game is skepticism; it is the ideal of science: everything is a hypothesis, and all hypotheses are ranked according to (1) how well they are individually supported by existing objective observations, and (2) how well they integrate with the existing body of theorems and hypotheses that are currently accepted as the strongest candidates.

*Goodness:* The language game is commitment to an acceptance of the validity of all harmless ways of living.

It is important to note that still a commitment. It is one thing to be open to all frameworks. It is another thing to insist that everyone should be open to all frameworks. This gets close to the paradox of tolerance:

> “Less well known is the paradox of tolerance: Unlimited tolerance must lead to the disappearance of tolerance. If we extend unlimited tolerance even to those who are intolerant, if we are not prepared to defend a tolerant society against the onslaught of the intolerant, then the tolerant will be destroyed, and tolerance with them. — In this formulation, I do not imply, for instance, that we should always suppress the utterance of intolerant philosophies; as long as we can counter them by rational argument and keep them in check by public opinion, suppression would certainly be unwise. But we should claim the right to suppress them if necessary even by force; for it may easily turn out that they are not prepared to meet us on the level of rational argument, but begin by denouncing all argument; they may forbid their followers to listen to rational argument, because it is deceptive, and teach them to answer arguments by the use of their fists or pistols. We should therefore claim, in the name of tolerance, the right not to tolerate the intolerant.” (Karl Popper;  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Paradox_of_tolerance)
> 

There is an internal logic specific to having accepted that God exists. That logic is this: everything is possible, and nothing is provable.

(be equally critical of people who are too far on each side of the faith vs revisability continuum)

- Make the point that faith isn’t irrational. It isn’t intellectual dishonesty. Some people who choose faith may very well be irrational and they may be intellectually dishonest, but that is a different, orthogonal set of concerns. Atheists can also be irrational and intellectually dishonest. Faith has its own domain of rationality and intellectual honesty. When someone accepts the premises that often come with faith (e.g., God exists and nothing is impossible for him), it makes it hard to have a conversation with someone who hasn’t accepted those premises. But it doesn’t mean that one person is rational and one person isn’t.
- We can ask, “Is it irrational to accept the premise that god exists?” On the basis of rationality, we can infer that there are dozens, if not hundreds, of deities, and that people believe in them base
- The fundamental difference between the believer and the non-believer is that they perceive different amounts of commitment as appropriate in the domain of belief about the nature of reality.
- There is nothing inherently wrong with choosing to make commitments to a religion or a country or a relationship (although, in practice, these commitments can close us off to information that would make us better, more ethical people if we allowed ourselves to hear it and incorporate it).
- Make the point that the church leadership goes wrong when it cuts people off from choosing their own place on the continuum. It overlays a moral and spiritual interdiction against questioning.
- Also, it is the object of commitment that is sometimes the problem. Asking people to be committed to good ideals is usually not such a bad thing. Asking people to be committed to a prophet ends up requiring a practical belief that the prophet is infallible (because the commitment essentially means that you are closing yourself off to new evidence that the prophet might not be worth listening to). When evidence inevitably appears that the prophet is not infallible, members are forced to either contort themselves into a belief that the prophet is still somehow correct (e.g., by focusing on an ambiguity in what he said — for example, in Stallion Cornell’s defense of the original D&C 101, which defines marriage as being between one man and one woman, he notes that it is ambiguous about polygamy because it doesn’t say “only one woman”, leaving open the possibility that later revelations might include more than one woman), or they are forced to admit that sometimes the prophet speaks as a man, and not a prophet. But the test for discerning between these two cases isn’t clear. So far, it simply seems to be: when the prophet’s statement turns out to be true, he was speaking as a prophet. If it is later proven to be false, then he was clearly speaking as a man.
- Mormon proselytizing efforts rest entirely on the belief that it is right and good for other people to question their current belief system. Missionaries undermine other people’s certainty about their existing belief system; they ask and encourage them to question and doubt. But when people make the leap and join the LDS faith, what they find is that they are no longer allowed to question their belief system; indeed, it is sinful and an affront to God — it is a victory for Satan if you ask difficult questions or critique the leadership of the church. People are expected to be infinitely flexible and revisable on their way in to Mormonism, and then they are expected to be infinitely committed once they are in.
- Make the point that you’ve been in their shoes, but in most cases they haven’t been in your shoes. Mention the idea (found in “Deconstructing Mormonism”) that Mormonism is like a box where the instructions for getting out are written on the outside. This is just another way of saying that the lifestyle that you need to live in order to see the danger and the dishonesty of mormonism is not available to Mormons who are living the Mormon lifestyle (They are not allowed to actually try these other lifestyles to test whether there is anything good in them —e.g., it is sinful to even try coffee to see if there is anything redeeming in it — it is seen as a lack of faith in the prophet, and therefore a betrayal of God). This is the counterpoint to the idea that spiritual knowledge can only be gained by living a spiritual life.

[[Ó Maurice Merleau-Ponty]] on [[faith versus good faith]]

“Man’s value does not consist in either an explosive, maniac sincerity or an unquestioned faith. Instead, it consists of a higher awareness which enables him to determine the moment when it is reasonable to take things on trust and the moment when questioning is in order, to combine faith and good faith within himself” (Merleau-Ponty, “Faith and Good Faith” 179).

“If sincerity is one’s highest value, one will never become fully committed to anything, not to a Church or to a party, not to a love or a friendship, not even to a particular task; for commitment always assumes that one’s affirmation surpasses one’s knowledge, that one believes by hearsay, that one gives up the rule of sincerity for that of responsibility” (Ibid 179).

What are some examples of the LDS emphasis on total commitment (and prohibiting questioning)?

- Henry J. Eyring: “Am I true?” This same approach is mentioned by Truman Madsen in his article on “20 questions”. This is also suggested in some of Terry Warner’s talks, where he emphasizes a notion of truth that is not strictly the correspondence theory of truth, but is rather the notion of truth derived from “troth”, which means committed (e.g., betrothed), and being “true to one’s word” ([https://eom.byu.edu/index.php/Truth](https://eom.byu.edu/index.php/Truth).
- “Not everything that is true is useful” (I believe both Boyd K Packer and Dallin H Oaks have used this). Dallin H Oaks used this as a context for his statement that it is wrong to criticize priesthood leaders of the church, even when the criticism is true.
- Here is an extreme example of “Not everything that is true is useful.” Larry Corbridge (Q70) at a BYU devotional in 2019. He says to focus on the four primary questions: god, jesus, JS, and LDS church. Everything else is secondary, and we should answer the primary questions before we answer the secondary questions. From Daily Universe article: “To answer these questions, Elder Corbridge taught students four different methods to discover truth. He listed the scientific method, analytical method, academic method and divine methods as each being necessary.” ([https://universe.byu.edu/2019/01/22/elder-corbridge-addresses-students-on-avoiding-personal-deception/](https://universe.byu.edu/2019/01/22/elder-corbridge-addresses-students-on-avoiding-personal-deception/)). But how are we supposed to answer the question of joseph smith being a prophet without learning anything about him first? How can we approach this question scientifically, analytically, or academically without encountering the secondary questions about Joseph Smith? And doesn’t God already give an order of operations in D&C? He says we are to study the matter out in our minds first (i.e., exhaust the analytical, scientific, and academic methods first) before we come to him asking for knowledge. Are we supposed to just hear Joseph Smith’s name mentioned and then shut our ears until God tells us that this person who we know nothing about was a prophet of god? This is the total commitment that the church expects. Ignore other evidence after you have received an emotional witness of these four primary things, and even before you have received that witness, ignore all other questions and information about them. Just ask God if they are true, over and over again until you eventually get a warm, positive feeling that you will immediately associate with the question you just asked. [https://speeches.byu.edu/talks/lawrence-corbridge_stand-for-ever/](https://speeches.byu.edu/talks/lawrence-corbridge_stand-for-ever/). He also says that we should believe in miracles like the seer stone because the human eye is way more impressive and miraculous than a stone that helps you communicate with a deity and/or translate a book. This talk, along with the Renlund talk and the Henry J Eyring talk, illustrates that the church is targeting college-aged members with messages that discourage them from doubting. It is fascinating that these messages are being delivered primarily on college campuses, where the students should be learning skills for critical thinking.
- “Doubt your doubts before you doubt your faith.” (Deiter F Uchtdorf)
- Elder (and Sister) Renlund [[https://www.lds.org/broadcasts/article/satellite-training-broadcast/2018/06/doubt-not-but-be-believing?lang=eng](https://www.lds.org/broadcasts/article/satellite-training-broadcast/2018/06/doubt-not-but-be-believing?lang=eng)]: Continuing to ask questions about the church, after having received a few answers, is like playing whack-a-mole. We should not “choose to be a perpetual doubter.” This dangerously trivializes the experience of someone going through a faith crisis. It shows a remarkable lack of empathy.
- The only perfectly reliable sources of information come from the LDS church, according to the gospel doctrine lesson manual: [https://www.lds.org/manual/doctrinal-mastery-doctrine-and-covenants-and-church-history-teacher-material/acquiring-spiritual-knowledge-part-2?lang=eng](https://www.lds.org/manual/doctrinal-mastery-doctrine-and-covenants-and-church-history-teacher-material/acquiring-spiritual-knowledge-part-2?lang=eng). This is also implied in the introduction to the Gospel Topics essays [[https://www.lds.org/topics/essays?lang=eng](https://www.lds.org/topics/essays?lang=eng)]. This is a risky position for anyone to take. It requires total commitment and a closing off of oneself to any outside sources of information. In effect, all information is ensured to be confirmatory of the claims of the church.

What are some examples of the LDS emphasis on feeling and emotion as a route to truth?

- Henry B. Eyring (via his son Henry J Eyring): “How do you feel when you read the Book of Abraham? What else do you need to know?”
- It is disingenuous. The church often relies on scholarship to establish truth. But only when it supports its beliefs. For example, Jeffrey R Holland’s claim that people who leave the church must do so by crawling around the Book of Mormon and the mountain of evidence that it is a historical document, and not just a fictitious creation of Joseph Smith. But this ignores the compelling evidence against the Book of Mormon as a historical document. Even when talking about prophecies (for example: [https://www.lds.org/study/history/topics/prophecies-of-joseph-smith?lang=eng](https://www.lds.org/study/history/topics/prophecies-of-joseph-smith?lang=eng)), the church implicitly relies on an argument that it is improbable that a prophecy might have come to pass by chance alone. But as soon as you allow probability to enter into the discussion, you must allow all of its implications, too. For example, have we accounted for all of the times that this particular prophet predicted something that didn’t come true? Have we considered all of the times that a Mormon prophet, generally speaking, has predicted something that didn’t come true? Have we considered all of the times that any leader from any other church might have predicted something similar to what a Mormon prophet prophesied, and it didn’t come true (or it did come true)? All of these inform our understanding of how likely it is that the “fulfilled” prophecy might be a false positive. Joseph Smith is reported to have said that people live on the moon, and that they look like quakers ([https://www.fairmormon.org/answers/Question:_Did_Joseph_Smith_state_that_the_moon_was_inhabited,_and_that_its_inhabitants_were_dressed_like_Quakers%3F](https://www.fairmormon.org/answers/Question:_Did_Joseph_Smith_state_that_the_moon_was_inhabited,_and_that_its_inhabitants_were_dressed_like_Quakers%3F)). This belief was not unique to Joseph Smith during his times, but a prophet of God might have known better. Would his utterance have been a confirmation of his divine calling if we had later actually discovered a bunch of quakers on the moon?